{\rtf1\ansi
\b Pscal Built-ins\b0\par
This document lists all built-in functions supported by Pscal.\par
\par
\ul General\ul0\par
inttostr - Convert integer to string.\par
length - Length of string or array.\par
halt - Stop program execution.\par
delay - Pause for specified milliseconds.\par
new - Allocate memory for a pointer.\par
dispose - Free memory.\par
exit - Exit program with code.\par
ord - Character code.\par
inc - Increment variable.\par
dec - Decrement variable.\par
low - Lowest index of array/string.\par
high - Highest index of array/string.\par
screencols - Number of columns in console.\par
screenrows - Number of rows in console.\par
chr - Convert code to character.\par
succ - Successor of ordinal value.\par
upcase - Convert character to uppercase.\par
pos - Position of substring.\par
copy - Copy substring.\par
realtostr - Convert real to string.\par
paramcount - Number of command line parameters.\par
paramstr - Command line parameter by index.\par
wherex - Current cursor X position.\par
wherey - Current cursor Y position.\par
gotoxy - Move cursor.\par
keypressed - True if key waiting.\par
readkey - Read key.\par
textcolor - Set text color.\par
textbackground - Set background color.\par
textcolore - Extended text color.\par
textbackgrounde - Extended background color.\par
quitrequested - True if window close requested.\par
real - Convert integer to real.\par
\par
\ul File I/O\ul0\par
assign - Bind a file variable to a name.\par
reset - Open file for reading.\par
rewrite - Open file for writing.\par
close - Close file.\par
readln - Read line from file or console.\par
eof - Test end of file.\par
ioresult - Return last I/O error code.\par
\par
\ul Memory streams\ul0\par
mstreamcreate - Create memory stream.\par
mstreamloadfromfile - Load file into memory stream.\par
mstreamsavetofile - Save memory stream to file.\par
mstreamfree - Release memory stream.\par
\par
\ul Math\ul0\par
abs - Absolute value.\par
round - Round real to nearest integer.\par
sqr - Square of number.\par
sqrt - Square root.\par
exp - Exponential.\par
ln - Natural logarithm.\par
cos - Cosine.\par
sin - Sine.\par
tan - Tangent.\par
trunc - Truncate real to integer.\par
\par
\ul Random\ul0\par
randomize - Seed random generator.\par
random - Random number.\par
\par
\ul DOS/OS\ul0\par
dos_getenv - Get environment variable.\par
dos_exec - Execute shell command.\par
dos_mkdir - Create directory.\par
dos_rmdir - Remove directory.\par
dos_findfirst - Begin directory search.\par
dos_findnext - Continue directory search.\par
dos_getdate - Get system date.\par
dos_gettime - Get system time.\par
dos_getfattr - Get file attributes.\par
\par
\ul Networking\ul0\par
api_send - Send network packet.\par
api_receive - Receive network packet.\par
\par
\ul SDL graphics and audio (enabled with SDL)\ul0\par
initgraph - Initialize graphics.\par
closegraph - Close graphics.\par
graphloop - Poll events and delay.\par
updatescreen - Present renderer.\par
cleardevice - Clear renderer.\par
setcolor - Set drawing color.\par
setrgbcolor - Set drawing color by RGB.\par
setalphablend - Configure alpha blending.\par
putpixel - Draw pixel.\par
drawline - Draw line.\par
drawrect - Draw rectangle.\par
fillrect - Filled rectangle.\par
drawcircle - Draw circle.\par
fillcircle - Filled circle.\par
drawpolygon - Draw polygon.\par
getpixelcolor - Read pixel color.\par
getmaxx - Width of window.\par
getmaxy - Height of window.\par
gettextsize - Measure text.\par
outtextxy - Draw text at position.\par
waitkeyevent - Wait for key event.\par
setrendertarget - Select render target.\par
createtexture - Create texture.\par
createtargettexture - Create target texture.\par
destroytexture - Free texture.\par
loadimagetotexture - Load image file into texture.\par
rendercopy - Copy texture to renderer.\par
rendercopyrect - Copy part of texture.\par
rendercopyex - Render with rotation or flip.\par
updatetexture - Update texture contents.\par
rendertexttotexture - Render text into texture.\par
initsoundsystem - Initialize audio.\par
quitsoundsystem - Shut down audio.\par
loadsound - Load sound file.\par
playsound - Play sound.\par
issoundplaying - Query if sound playing.\par
inittextsystem - Initialize text subsystem.\par
quittextsystem - Shut down text subsystem.\par
getmousestate - Query mouse position and buttons.\par
getticks - Milliseconds since start.\par
}\n